ci: improve release workflow (#621)
DeepRank/deeprank2: README.dev.md

## Making a release

### Automated release workflow:

> 1. **IMP0RTANT:** Create a PR pointing to `main` for the release branch and make sure that there are no conflicts and that all checks pass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **IMP0RTANT:** Create a PR for the release branch, targeting the `main` branch. Ensure there are no conflicts and that all checks pass successfully. Release branches are typically: traditional [release branches](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/#release-branches) (these are created from the `dev` branch), or [hotfix branches](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/#hotfix-branches) (these are created directly from the `main` branch).
```

   - [Follow semantic versioning conventions](https://semver.org/) to chose the level increase:
     - `patch`: when backward compatible bug fixes were made
     - `minor`: when functionality was added in a backward compatible manner
     - `major`: when API-incompatible changes have been made
   - Note that you cannot release from `main` (the default shown) using the automated workflow. To release from `main`
     directly, you must [create the release manually](#manually-create-a-release).
4. Visit [Actions](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/actions) tab to check whether everything went as expected.
   - NOTE: there are two separate jobs in the workflow: "draft_release" and "tidy_workspace". The first creates the draft release on github, while the second merges changes into `dev` and closes the PR.
     - If "draft_release" fails, then there are likely merge conflicts with `main` that need to be resolved first. No release draft is created and the "tidy_workspace" job does not run. Coversely, if this action is succesfull, then the release branch (including a version bump) have been merged into the remote `main` branch.

>      - If "draft_release" is succesfull but "tidy_workspace" fails, then there are likely merge conflicts with `dev` that are not conflicts with `main`. In this case, the draft release is created (and changes were merged into the remote `main`). Conflicts with `dev` need to be resolved with `dev` by the user (note that this should never happen if the release branch was `dev`, as the only change will be the version bump).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - If "draft_release" is succesfull but "tidy_workspace" fails, then there are likely merge conflicts with `dev` that are not conflicts with `main`. In this case, the draft release is created (and changes were merged into the remote `main`). Conflicts with `dev` need to be resolved with `dev` by the user.
```

I removed this since the `dev` branch should never be the release branch

## Making a release

### Automated release workflow:

> 0. **IMP0RTANT:** Create a PR for the release branch (usually `dev`) and make sure that all checks pass!

Author: It doesn't really matter. The only reason to create the PR is to trigger the actions and check that there are no problems. I added that the PR should point to main, as that will then flag any potential conflicts.

   - if everything goes well, this PR will automatically be closed after the draft release is created.
1. Navigate to [Draft Github Release](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/actions/workflows/release_github.yml)
   on the [Actions](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/actions) tab.
2. On the right hand side, you can select the level increase ("patch", "minor", or "major") and which branch to release from.
   - [Follow semantic versioning conventions](https://semver.org/) to chose the level increase:
     - `patch`: when backward compatible bug fixes were made
     - `minor`: when functionality was added in a backward compatible manner
     - `major`: when API-incompatible changes have been made
   - Note that you cannot release from `main` (the default shown) using the automated workflow. To release from `main`
     directly, you must [create the release manually](#manually-create-a-release).
3. Visit [Actions](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/actions) tab to check whether everything went as expected.

>    - NOTE: there are two separate jobs in the workflow: "draft_release" and "tidy_workspace". The first creates the draft release on github, while the second merges changes into `dev` and closes the PR.

Reviewer: - I don't find any `draft_release` job, I think this is the one called `github_release`
- From the github workflow I see that the branch is also merged into main (during the `github_release` job) but this is done before bumping the version. Why? 
- In general, here we need a bit more details about the steps of release_github.yml for the `github_release` and the `tidy_workspace` jobs (like when there is merging to main, when the release branch is deleted and when it's not). I think that first changes are merged into main, and then they are merged back to dev from main.

Author: > * I don't find any `draft_release` job, I think this is the one called `github_release`

can you do check again. It used to be called "github_release", but I changed it to "draft_release". If checking locally, can you do `pull --rebase` as I had rebased this at some point (but before tagging you for review, so it should have been up to date).

>     * From the github workflow I see that the branch is also merged into main (during the `github_release` job) but this is done before bumping the version. Why?

I think the order doesn't really matter. I did it in this order in case there are conflicts, then the bump version doesn't have to happen at all. But ultimately, all these changes are done on the "local" main branch of the ci, and are only to the remote main in the step afterwards.

>     * In general, here we need a bit more details about the steps of release_github.yml for the `github_release` and the `tidy_workspace` jobs (like when there is merging to main, when the release branch is deleted and when it's not). I think that first changes are merged into main, and then they are merged back to dev from main.

Correct, I will add details about this.

     - If both jobs succeed, then the draft release is created and the changes are merged into `dev` without any problems and the associated PR is closed. Also, if the release branch is different from `dev`, then that branch will be deleted from the remote repository.
4. Navigate to the [Releases](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/releases) tab and click on the newest draft
   release that was just generated.
5. Click on the edit (pencil) icon on the right side of the draft release.
6. Check/adapt the release notes and make sure that everything is as expected.
7. Check that "Set as the latest release is checked".
8. Click green "Publish Release" button to convert the draft to a published release on GitHub.
   - This will automatically trigger [another GitHub workflow](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/actions/workflows/release.yml) that will take care of publishing the package on PyPi.

#### Updating the token:

> NOTE: the current token (associated to @DaniBodor) allowing to bypass branch protection will expire on 9 July 2025. To update the token do the following:

Reviewer: Is there no way to set up a non-expiring one? What if we use secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN for this scope as well? 

Also, the previous `actions/checkout@v3` didn't know any token. Maybe we can just stick to that instead of `actions/checkout@v4`?

Author: > Is there no way to set up a non-expiring one? 

There is, but [GitHub recommends against doing this](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/token-expiration-and-revocation#token-revoked-after-reaching-its-expiration-date) for security reasons (although they don't really elaborate on it). Do you want to set a non-expiring one anyway?

> What if we use secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN for this scope as well?

The reason we need a special token is because we need to bypass the branch protection of `main` and `dev`. I believe that GITHUB_TOKEN does not have admin rights to do so. I think it's possible to set up a GitHub bot for this, but I didn't manage to do that quickly and think that this is good enough for the time being.

> Also, the previous `actions/checkout@v3` didn't know any token. Maybe we can just stick to that instead of `actions/checkout@v4`?

:+1:

Author: > Is there no way to set up a non-expiring one? What if we use secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN for this scope as well?
> 
> Also, the previous `actions/checkout@v3` didn't know any token. Maybe we can just stick to that instead of `actions/checkout@v4`?

The reason we need a special token is because we need to bypass the branch protection of `main` and `dev`. I believe that GITHUB_TOKEN does not have admin rights to do so. I think it's possible to set up a GitHub bot for this, but I didn't manage to do that quickly and think that this is good enough for the time being.

It's possible to set non-expiring tokens, but [GitHub recommends against doing this](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/token-expiration-and-revocation#token-revoked-after-reaching-its-expiration-date) for security reasons (although they don't really elaborate on it). Do you want to set a non-expiring one anyway?

Reviewer: > It's possible to set non-expiring tokens, but [GitHub recommends against doing this](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/token-expiration-and-revocation#token-revoked-after-reaching-its-expiration-date) for security reasons (although they don't really elaborate on it). Do you want to set a non-expiring one anyway?

Yes, I don't think is convenient to have to update it unless there is a very valid (and clear) reason for doing so.

Author: So, I am still uncomfortable setting up a permanent token (under my account). There are several security risks with using a token without an expiration date (and GitHub "strongly recommends" using an expiration). Especially if we at some point stop maintaining this repo, I would like the token to eventually be transferred to whoever is maintaining it, which could easily drop off my radar if a permanent token exists.
If you still feel strongly about having a permanent token, then could you please set one up under your account. You can follow [these instructions](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/blob/170_release_workflow_dbodor/README.dev.md#updating-the-token) and it only takes a minute or so to do.

Author: This is what ChatGPT says why it's good to set an expiration date:

> Creating a non-expiring personal access token (PAT) is less secure for several reasons:
> 
> 1. **Increased Risk of Compromise**: A non-expiring token that is exposed or leaked (e.g., through accidental sharing, a compromised machine, or a code repository) will remain valid indefinitely. This provides an attacker with perpetual access to your resources, increasing the damage they can cause over time.
> 
> 2. **Lack of Rotation**: Security best practices encourage regularly rotating access credentials to reduce the impact of a potential compromise. Non-expiring tokens do not enforce rotation, leading to a situation where the same token is used for an extended period, increasing the risk window.
> 
> 3. **Forgotten Tokens**: Non-expiring tokens can easily be forgotten about, especially if they're not actively monitored. Over time, these forgotten tokens can accumulate, creating a broader attack surface that is hard to manage and secure.
> 
> 4. **No Expiry-Driven Audit**: Expiring tokens encourage regular audits of which tokens are in use, who is using them, and whether they are still necessary. Without expirations, there is less incentive to review or revoke unnecessary tokens, potentially leading to unused tokens that are still valid and vulnerable.
> 
> 5. **Reduced Control Over Access**: Expiration dates allow for automatic revocation of access, helping maintain tighter control over who can access your resources and when. Non-expiring tokens eliminate this automatic control, making it easier for unauthorized access to persist.
> 
> 6. **Compliance Requirements**: Many security frameworks and compliance standards require that access credentials have expiration dates to minimize risks associated with prolonged exposure. Non-expiring tokens may lead to compliance issues, especially in regulated industries.
> 
> By setting expiration dates on personal access tokens, you mitigate these risks, ensure better security hygiene, and maintain tighter control over access to your resources.

Reviewer: This is what ChatGPT says if I ask what is the trade off in such a situation:

> While security best practices advocate for expiring tokens due to the reasons you listed, there are situations—like yours—where convenience, project lifecycle, and the diminishing frequency of updates may justify using a non-expiring Personal Access Token (PAT). Here's a balanced view on whether expiration is truly necessary in your scenario and the associated risks:
>
> When Expiration is Less Critical:
> Low Sensitivity of the Repository: If the open-source project you're working on doesn't contain sensitive data, proprietary code, or anything of significant value (financial or reputational), then the impact of a compromised token is lower. In such cases, setting up a non-expiring token may be a reasonable decision if it saves you time and effort.
>
> Project Lifecycle: Since you mentioned that you're gradually stepping away from the project, the diminishing involvement in the project reduces the likelihood that you'll need to actively manage or monitor the token. In this scenario, revisiting and rotating tokens regularly may seem overburdening, especially as team members disengage over time.
>
> Limited Scope of the Token: If you scope the token very narrowly to limit its access (e.g., only giving it access to read from a single repository), the risks are reduced. An attacker with access to such a token wouldn’t be able to cause significant damage. Keeping it tightly scoped mitigates some of the broader risks typically associated with non-expiring tokens.

The best solution here would be to refresh the token without tying it to a personal account by using GitHub App. It seems relatively straightforward, it consists in [creating a GitHub App](https://docs.github.com/en/apps/creating-github-apps/registering-a-github-app/registering-a-github-app), generate there a private key, save it in GitHub Secrets, and updating that via a workflow periodically. Of course I am not sure whether then this is _really_ simple as it seems. I'd say either we go for the latter solution, or I use my personal account for setting a non-expiring token. @DaniBodor

Reviewer: We need to decide about this one

Reviewer: We decided to add a meaningful note about this, and leave an expiring token.

1. [Create a personal access token](https://github.com/settings/tokens/new) from a GitHub user account with admin
   priviliges for this repo.
2. Check all the "repo" boxes and the "workflow" box, set an expiration date, and give the token a note.
3. Click green "Generate token" button on the bottom
4. Copy the token immediately, as it will not be visible again later.
5. Navigate to the [secrets settings](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/settings/secrets/actions).
6. Edit the `GH_RELEASE` key giving your access token as the new value.

### Manually create a release:

0. Make sure you have all required developers tools installed `pip install -e .'[test]'`.

> 1. Create a `release` branch from `main` and merge the changes into this branch.

Reviewer: Create the release branch from dev (for the workflow we follow in deeprank2). See the old README.dev.md

Author: My idea is that we create a `release` branch from main and then merge any changes (whether `dev` or some hotfix branch) into `release`. Alternatively, `dev` can just be used directly, without creating the `release` branch at all, but i wanted to give unified instructions that don't depend on where the changes come from.
I clarified the instructions for this.

Reviewer: In the [branching workflow we are using](https://github.com/DeepRank/deeprank2/blob/main/README.dev.md#branching-workflow) the release branch is created from dev, and hotfix branches from main. I'd prefer to stick to the workflow in the automated action. In general, it's useful to have such an automation but it shouldn't make the process less clear than before.

Author: I don't understand your point. Maybe we can have a quick call about it rather than going back and forth on GH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a `release-` branch from `main` (if there has been an hotfix) or `dev` (regular new production release) and prepare the branch for the release (e.g., removing the unnecessary dev files, fix minor bugs if necessary).
```

I'd remove the two following bullet points:
```
   - Ensure that the `release` branch is ready to be merged back into `main` (e.g., removing the unnecessary files, fix minor bugs if necessary).
   - Normally speaking, `release` should contain the changes from `dev` (see our [development workflow](#branching-workflow)), although in some cases a hotfix may be implemented from a different branch.
 ```

Reviewer: Remember this that for some reason doesn't appear in my review below @DaniBodor
